README.md, before:

# MzS Tools

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.6372834.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6372834) [![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/mzs-tools/badge/?version=latest)](https://mzs-tools.readthedocs.io/it/latest/?badge=latest)

**QGIS plugin for italian Seismic Microzonation.**

Download and install from the QGIS 3.16+ plugin manager or directly from the [plugin repository](https://plugins.qgis.org/plugins/MzSTools/).

Documentation: [https://mzs-tools.readthedocs.io](https://mzs-tools.readthedocs.io)

## Changelog

### v1.6

- Fix Python error in geotec editing
- Update project template (snapping options, symbols)

### v1.5

- Ported to QGIS 3
- [Enhancements and fixes](https://github.com/CNR-IGAG/mzs-tools/milestone/1?closed=1)
- [Online documentation](https://mzs-tools.readthedocs.io) with sphinx and Read The Docs

### v1.4

-  Updated to new MS 4.2 standards;
-  update project (fixed labels, update .py files, added new style); 
-  updated italian manual.

### v1.3	

-  updated layout "CDI - Carta delle Indagini" (added legend);
-  updated export shapefiles and "Export geodatabase to project folder" tool (to meet the standards);
-  removed "Validate project" tool;
-  fixed bug in log files;
-  update project (fixed labels, update .py files);
-  updated italian manual.

### v1.2

-  updated layouts ("Carta di Microzonazione Sismica (FA 0.1-0.5 s)", "Carta di Microzonazione Sismica (FA 0.4-0.8 s)", "Carta di Microzonazione Sismica (FA 0.7-1.1 s)");
-  added "pkey" field in "Indagini" and "Parametri" tables;
-  removed english manual.	

### v1.1

-  modified the layout layer "CDI - Indagini puntuali";
-  modified the layout layer "MOPS - HVSR";
-  updated export database ("CdI_Tabelle.sqlite").

### v1.0

-  stable version;
-  added a new video-guide ("Indagine stazione singola (HVSR)");
-  update project (fixed labels and styles errors, update .py files);
-  updated italian manuals.

### v0.9

-  update table "Indagine stazione singola (HVSR)", "freq.ui" mask and added a new layout ("Carta delle frequenze naturali dei terreni fr");
-  update constraint "quota_slm_top_verify" and "quota_slm_bot_verify" in "indagini_puntuali", "parametri_puntuali" and "parametri_lineari" tables;	
-  moved export process to a separate thread;
-  export progress shown in qgis interface;				
-  fixed bug in "siti_ind_param.py";
-  update "New project" tool;
-  added a new table ("metadati");
-  added a new video-guide ("Indagine stazione singola (HVSR)");
-  update project (in particular .ui, .py files);
-  updated italian manuals.

### v0.8

-  fixed bug in "indagini_puntuali.py";
-  update "siti_puntuali" and "siti_lineari" triggers;
-  added a new table ("Indagine stazione singola (HVSR)") and a new layout ("Carta delle frequenze naturali dei terreni");
-  update project (in particular .ui, .py files);
-  changed update project process and removed "Update project" tool;
-  updated italian manuals.
		
### v0.7

-  moved import process to a separate thread;
-  import progress shown in qgis interface;
-  fixed bug with empty numeric values in csv files during import;
-  reimplemented import log file;
-  added "Update project" tool;
-  update project (in particular .ui, .py files);
-  updated italian manuals.
		
### v0.6

-  video-guide additions;
-  update project (in particular .ui, .py files);
-  resolved bugs;
-  updated italian manual.
		
### v0.5

-  improved "Add feature or record" tool;
-  removed useless tool;
-  update project (in particular .ui, .py files);
-  resolved bugs;
-  updated manuals.
		
### v0.4

-  initial relase.

## Development

Some Python and PyQT libraries may be required depending on the development environment used. On Ubuntu:

```bash
sudo apt install python3-pip virtualenv python3-venv qttools5-dev-tools pyqt5-dev-tools
```

Example of a Linux development environment with Visual Studio Code, poetry and pb_tool:

- Install [poetry](https://python-poetry.org/)
- Install [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) with the Python, Pylance and reStructuredText (for documentation) extensions.
    - If needed, install the python libraries required for reStructuredText extension (`pip install snooty-lextudio rstcheck`)
- Clone the repository
- Execute `poetry install`
- Open the project in vscode
- Set vscode python interpreter (ctrl-shift-P - "Python: Select interpreter"), selecting the "Poetry" virtualenv in the list
- Set `PYTHONPATH` in `.env` according to the position of the QGIS python libraries in your system
- Change `plugin_path` in `pb_tool.cfg` according to the QGIS plugin path on your system
- Execute `poetry shell` followed by `pb_tool deploy` to install the current plugin version in QGIS (`pb_tool --help` for more commands)
- Install "First Aid" (for debugging) and "Plugin Reloader" (to reload the plugin deployed with `pb_tool deploy`) plugins in QGIS
- Optionally, check and update the linting and formatting options in `.vscode/settings.json`.

Utility scripts:

- Use the `update_project_template.sh` script (execute from the root of the repository), to update `data/progetto_MS.zip` package with modifications made in the `template_code` directory.
- Use `trans_update.sh` to update the translations and then open the `.ts` file(s) in `poedit` to translate new strings or update existing translations.
- Use `trans_compile.sh` to compile the updated translation(s).

Commit message:

- Prepare for v1.7 - Update ISTAT administrative boundaries and codes to the [latest 2022 version](https://www.istat.it/it/archivio/222527)

README.md, after:

# MzS Tools

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.6372834.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6372834) [![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/mzs-tools/badge/?version=latest)](https://mzs-tools.readthedocs.io/it/latest/?badge=latest)

**QGIS plugin for italian Seismic Microzonation.**

Download and install from the QGIS 3.16+ plugin manager or directly from the [plugin repository](https://plugins.qgis.org/plugins/MzSTools/).

Documentation: [https://mzs-tools.readthedocs.io](https://mzs-tools.readthedocs.io)

## Changelog

### v1.7

- Update ISTAT administrative boundaries and codes to the [latest 2022 version](https://www.istat.it/it/archivio/222527)

### v1.6

- Fix Python error in geotec editing
- Update project template (snapping options, symbols)

### v1.5

- Ported to QGIS 3
- [Enhancements and fixes](https://github.com/CNR-IGAG/mzs-tools/milestone/1?closed=1)
- [Online documentation](https://mzs-tools.readthedocs.io) with sphinx and Read The Docs

### v1.4

-  Updated to new MS 4.2 standards;
-  update project (fixed labels, update .py files, added new style); 
-  updated italian manual.

### v1.3	

-  updated layout "CDI - Carta delle Indagini" (added legend);
-  updated export shapefiles and "Export geodatabase to project folder" tool (to meet the standards);
-  removed "Validate project" tool;
-  fixed bug in log files;
-  update project (fixed labels, update .py files);
-  updated italian manual.

### v1.2

-  updated layouts ("Carta di Microzonazione Sismica (FA 0.1-0.5 s)", "Carta di Microzonazione Sismica (FA 0.4-0.8 s)", "Carta di Microzonazione Sismica (FA 0.7-1.1 s)");
-  added "pkey" field in "Indagini" and "Parametri" tables;
-  removed english manual.	

### v1.1

-  modified the layout layer "CDI - Indagini puntuali";
-  modified the layout layer "MOPS - HVSR";
-  updated export database ("CdI_Tabelle.sqlite").

### v1.0

-  stable version;
-  added a new video-guide ("Indagine stazione singola (HVSR)");
-  update project (fixed labels and styles errors, update .py files);
-  updated italian manuals.

### v0.9

-  update table "Indagine stazione singola (HVSR)", "freq.ui" mask and added a new layout ("Carta delle frequenze naturali dei terreni fr");
-  update constraint "quota_slm_top_verify" and "quota_slm_bot_verify" in "indagini_puntuali", "parametri_puntuali" and "parametri_lineari" tables;	
-  moved export process to a separate thread;
-  export progress shown in qgis interface;				
-  fixed bug in "siti_ind_param.py";
-  update "New project" tool;
-  added a new table ("metadati");
-  added a new video-guide ("Indagine stazione singola (HVSR)");
-  update project (in particular .ui, .py files);
-  updated italian manuals.

### v0.8

-  fixed bug in "indagini_puntuali.py";
-  update "siti_puntuali" and "siti_lineari" triggers;
-  added a new table ("Indagine stazione singola (HVSR)") and a new layout ("Carta delle frequenze naturali dei terreni");
-  update project (in particular .ui, .py files);
-  changed update project process and removed "Update project" tool;
-  updated italian manuals.
		
### v0.7

-  moved import process to a separate thread;
-  import progress shown in qgis interface;
-  fixed bug with empty numeric values in csv files during import;
-  reimplemented import log file;
-  added "Update project" tool;
-  update project (in particular .ui, .py files);
-  updated italian manuals.
		
### v0.6

-  video-guide additions;
-  update project (in particular .ui, .py files);
-  resolved bugs;
-  updated italian manual.
		
### v0.5

-  improved "Add feature or record" tool;
-  removed useless tool;
-  update project (in particular .ui, .py files);
-  resolved bugs;
-  updated manuals.
		
### v0.4

-  initial relase.

## Development

Some Python and PyQT libraries may be required depending on the development environment used. On Ubuntu:

```bash
sudo apt install python3-pip virtualenv python3-venv qttools5-dev-tools pyqt5-dev-tools
```

Example of a Linux development environment with Visual Studio Code, poetry and pb_tool:

- Install [poetry](https://python-poetry.org/)
- Install [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) with the Python, Pylance and reStructuredText (for documentation) extensions.
    - If needed, install the python libraries required for reStructuredText extension (`pip install snooty-lextudio rstcheck`)
- Clone the repository
- Execute `poetry install`
- Open the project in vscode
- Set vscode python interpreter (ctrl-shift-P - "Python: Select interpreter"), selecting the "Poetry" virtualenv in the list
- Set `PYTHONPATH` in `.env` according to the position of the QGIS python libraries in your system
- Change `plugin_path` in `pb_tool.cfg` according to the QGIS plugin path on your system
- Execute `poetry shell` followed by `pb_tool deploy` to install the current plugin version in QGIS (`pb_tool --help` for more commands)
- Install "First Aid" (for debugging) and "Plugin Reloader" (to reload the plugin deployed with `pb_tool deploy`) plugins in QGIS
- Optionally, check and update the linting and formatting options in `.vscode/settings.json`.

Utility scripts:

- Use the `update_project_template.sh` script (execute from the root of the repository), to update `data/progetto_MS.zip` package with modifications made in the `template_code` directory.
- Use `trans_update.sh` to update the translations and then open the `.ts` file(s) in `poedit` to translate new strings or update existing translations.
- Use `trans_compile.sh` to compile the updated translation(s).
