docs/development/testing.md, before:

# Testing the plugin

The plugin uses [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/) with [pytest-qgis](https://github.com/GispoCoding/pytest-qgis) and [pytest-qt](https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest-qt) for comprehensive testing. Tests are organized in the `tests` directory in separate subfolders with clear separation of concerns:

- `tests/unit`: unit tests
- `tests/integration`: integration tests
- `tests/e2e`: end-to-end tests

## Test Organization Principles

### Unit Tests (`tests/unit/`)

- **Purpose**: Test individual functions and classes in isolation
- **Dependencies**: Keep dependencies minimal (if any), preferably use mocking to avoid QGIS dependencies
- **Example**: Testing mathematical calculations, utility functions

### Integration Tests (`tests/integration/`)

- **Purpose**: Test functionality that requires interaction between different components and/or QGIS environment
- **Dependencies**: Tests could depend on PyQGIS libraries or entire QGIS environment
- **Example**: Testing map tools, layer operations, GUI components

### End-to-End Tests (`tests/e2e/`)

- **Purpose**: Test complete workflows and user interactions
- **Dependencies**: Full QGIS environment, possibly with test data
- **Example**: Testing plugin initialization, configuration, and execution of main features

### Test Markers

Tests in each category are automatically marked as `unit`, `integration`, or `e2e` in the specific `conftest.py`. This allows easy filtering of tests during execution.

The test execution order is enforced by the `pytest_collection_modifyitems` hook in the root `conftest.py`:

- Unit tests (`unit`) execute first
- Integration tests (`integration`) execute second
- E2E tests (`e2e`) execute last

This works by examining each test item's file path and grouping them accordingly, then reordering the entire test collection before execution. This approach works regardless of how pytest is invoked.

Tests should be further organized by using appropriate markers to indicate particular characteristics:

- `@pytest.mark.no_qgis`: Tests that do not require QGIS environment. This can be useful to quickly filter tests for CI environments where QGIS is not available.
- `@pytest.mark.display`: Tests that display GUIs for visual inspection, but can be run in headless CI environments by using `QT_QPA_PLATFORM=offscreen` environment setting or other techniques.
- `@pytest.mark.visual`: Tests that require visual inspection of GUIs or visual output (e.g., map rendering) and are not suitable for headless CI environments.

### GUI Tests

GUI tests should use `pytest-qt` to simulate user interactions and verify GUI behavior. Use `qtbot` fixture for interacting with Qt widgets.

GUI tests can be configured to show the interface for visual inspection for a configurable timeout period. To facilitate this, use the `gui_timeout` fixture defined in `tests/conftest.py`, which reads the timeout value from the `GUI_TIMEOUT` environment variable (defaulting to 2000 ms if not set). This allows easy adjustment of the timeout duration for visual inspection during test runs. The `gui_timeout` fixture should be used to add a delay after showing the GUI in tests:

```python
dialog.show()
qtbot.wait(gui_timeout)
```

The gui tests can also be run in headless mode in CI environments by setting the `QT_QPA_PLATFORM` environment variable to `offscreen` or using the `--qgis_disable_gui` pytest option. The `gui_timeout` will be set to 0 in such cases to avoid unnecessary delays.

## Run tests

### Using justfile (recommended)

```bash
# Run all tests with pytest and coverage info, without GUI display
just test

# The justfile command is equivalent to:
uv sync --no-group ci
# the "--no-group ci" option might be required to avoid Qt library conflicts with qgis-plugin-ci dependencies
uv sync --group testing
uv run pytest --cov=mzs_tools --cov-report=term-missing --qgis_disable_gui

# Run all tests with pytest and coverage info, with GUI display (GUI_TIMEOUT in seconds, default 2)
just test-gui 2
```

### Using pytest directly

```bash
# Run all tests
uv run pytest -v

# Run with coverage report
uv run pytest -v --cov=mzs_tools --cov-report=term-missing

# Run specific test file
uv run pytest tests/unit/test_plugin_main.py -v
uv run pytest tests/qgis/test_plugin_main_qgis.py -v

# Run specific test class
uv run pytest tests/unit/test_plugin_main.py::TestDipStrikeToolsPluginBasic -v

# Run specific test method
uv run pytest tests/unit/test_plugin_main.py::TestDipStrikeToolsPluginBasic::test_plugin_import -v

# Run only unit tests using marker
uv run pytest -m unit

# Run only integration tests
uv run pytest -m integration

# Exclude e2e tests
uv run pytest -m "not e2e"

uv run pytest tests/unit/          # Run only unit tests
uv run pytest tests/integration/   # Run only integration tests
```

## Coverage

The project uses coverage.py to track test coverage:

```bash
# Generate coverage report
uv run pytest --cov=mzs_tools --cov-report=html

# View HTML coverage report
open htmlcov/index.html
```

Coverage configuration is in `pyproject.toml`.

Commit message:

experiment with tox and docker for test environments

docs/development/testing.md, after:

# Testing the plugin

The plugin uses [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/) with [pytest-qgis](https://github.com/GispoCoding/pytest-qgis) and [pytest-qt](https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest-qt) for comprehensive testing. Tests are organized in the `tests` directory in separate subfolders with clear separation of concerns:

- `tests/unit`: unit tests
- `tests/integration`: integration tests
- `tests/e2e`: end-to-end tests

For testing with different QGIS versions using Docker, see [docker-testing.md](docker-testing.md).

## Test Organization Principles

### Unit Tests (`tests/unit/`)

- **Purpose**: Test individual functions and classes in isolation
- **Dependencies**: Keep dependencies minimal (if any), preferably use mocking to avoid QGIS dependencies
- **Example**: Testing mathematical calculations, utility functions

### Integration Tests (`tests/integration/`)

- **Purpose**: Test functionality that requires interaction between different components and/or QGIS environment
- **Dependencies**: Tests could depend on PyQGIS libraries or entire QGIS environment
- **Example**: Testing map tools, layer operations, GUI components

### End-to-End Tests (`tests/e2e/`)

- **Purpose**: Test complete workflows and user interactions
- **Dependencies**: Full QGIS environment, possibly with test data
- **Example**: Testing plugin initialization, configuration, and execution of main features

### Test Markers

Tests in each category are automatically marked as `unit`, `integration`, or `e2e` in the specific `conftest.py`. This allows easy filtering of tests during execution.

The test execution order is enforced by the `pytest_collection_modifyitems` hook in the root `conftest.py`:

- Unit tests (`unit`) execute first
- Integration tests (`integration`) execute second
- E2E tests (`e2e`) execute last

This works by examining each test item's file path and grouping them accordingly, then reordering the entire test collection before execution. This approach works regardless of how pytest is invoked.

Tests should be further organized by using appropriate markers to indicate particular characteristics:

- `@pytest.mark.no_qgis`: Tests that do not require QGIS environment. This can be useful to quickly filter tests for CI environments where QGIS is not available.
- `@pytest.mark.display`: Tests that display GUIs for visual inspection, but can be run in headless CI environments by using `QT_QPA_PLATFORM=offscreen` environment setting or other techniques.
- `@pytest.mark.visual`: Tests that require visual inspection of GUIs or visual output (e.g., map rendering) and are not suitable for headless CI environments.

### GUI Tests

GUI tests should use `pytest-qt` to simulate user interactions and verify GUI behavior. Use `qtbot` fixture for interacting with Qt widgets.

GUI tests can be configured to show the interface for visual inspection for a configurable timeout period. To facilitate this, use the `gui_timeout` fixture defined in `tests/conftest.py`, which reads the timeout value from the `GUI_TIMEOUT` environment variable (defaulting to 2000 ms if not set). This allows easy adjustment of the timeout duration for visual inspection during test runs. The `gui_timeout` fixture should be used to add a delay after showing the GUI in tests:

```python
dialog.show()
qtbot.wait(gui_timeout)
```

The gui tests can also be run in headless mode in CI environments by setting the `QT_QPA_PLATFORM` environment variable to `offscreen` or using the `--qgis_disable_gui` pytest option. The `gui_timeout` will be set to 0 in such cases to avoid unnecessary delays.

## Run tests

### Using justfile (recommended)

```bash
# Run all tests with pytest and coverage info, without GUI display
just test

# Run all tests with pytest and coverage info, with GUI display (GUI_TIMEOUT in seconds, default 2)
just test-gui 2

# Run tests with different QGIS versions using Docker (see docker-testing.md for details)
just test-docker-quick       # Quick test with stable QGIS
just test-docker-stable      # Test with QGIS stable (3.44)
just test-docker-ltr         # Test with QGIS LTR (3.40)
just test-docker-latest      # Test with latest QGIS build
just test-docker-qt6         # Test with Qt6 QGIS build
just test-docker-all         # Test with all QGIS versions
```

The base test command is equivalent to:

```bash
uv sync --no-group ci
# the "--no-group ci" option might be required to avoid Qt library conflicts with qgis-plugin-ci dependencies
uv sync --group testing
uv run pytest --cov=mzs_tools --cov-report=term-missing --qgis_disable_gui
```

### Using pytest directly

```bash
# Run all tests
uv run pytest -v

# Run with coverage report
uv run pytest -v --cov=mzs_tools --cov-report=term-missing

# Run specific test file
uv run pytest tests/unit/test_plugin_main.py -v
uv run pytest tests/qgis/test_plugin_main_qgis.py -v

# Run specific test class
uv run pytest tests/unit/test_plugin_main.py::TestDipStrikeToolsPluginBasic -v

# Run specific test method
uv run pytest tests/unit/test_plugin_main.py::TestDipStrikeToolsPluginBasic::test_plugin_import -v

# Run only unit tests using marker
uv run pytest -m unit

# Run only integration tests
uv run pytest -m integration

# Exclude e2e tests
uv run pytest -m "not e2e"

uv run pytest tests/unit/          # Run only unit tests
uv run pytest tests/integration/   # Run only integration tests
```

## Coverage

The project uses coverage.py to track test coverage:

```bash
# Generate coverage report
uv run pytest --cov=mzs_tools --cov-report=html

# View HTML coverage report
open htmlcov/index.html
```

Coverage configuration is in `pyproject.toml`.
